# Changelog

## [0.7.0] - 2026-04-16
- New features:
    - Started the **Smiffer Utilities** application. Use it via `volgrids smutils`.
        - First utility: `volgrids smutils resids_nonpb`.
            - Use it to print a space-separated list of RNA residue indices for nucleotides that are not currently engaged in a canonical base-pairing interaction.
            - Requires **rnapolis** to be installed (`pip install rnapolis`).
    - Added `--resids` (`-i`) flag to **Smiffer**.
        - A custom list of residue indices can now be specified. SMIFs will be calculated for only those residues.
        - Trimming and APBS remain unaffected.
        - Combine it with `resids_nonpb` to have more polished hbond results, e.g.:
        ```bash
        python3 volgrids smiffer rna 1akx.pdb \
            -i "$(python3 volgrids smutils resids_nonbp 1akx.pdb)" \
            -c DO_SMIF_STACKING=false DO_SMIF_HYDROPHOBIC=false DO_SMIF_HYDROPHILIC=false \
                DO_SMIF_HBA=true DO_SMIF_HBD=true HBONDS_ONLY_NUCLEOBASE=true
        ```
- Tweaks:
    - Renamed `DO_SIMPLE_HBONDS_RNA` to `HBONDS_ONLY_NUCLEOBASE`.
    - An error is now raised for invalid configuration keys.
    - A list of known configuration keys can be printed by passing the -c flag with no values following.
        - It still needs to have the required arguments behind. So use it like e.g. `volgrids smiffer rna 1akx.pdb -c`.


## [0.6.1] - 2026-04-10
- Cavities can now also be used to *weight* the smifs instead of trimming them.
    - The `CAVITIES_WEIGHT` configuration controls how much the smifs inside cavities should be taken into account.
    - Positive `CAVITIES_WEIGHT` values give more weight to smifs inside cavities; negative values give more weight to smifs outside.
- Added `DO_SIMPLE_HBONDS_RNA` configuration (default: false)
    - When set to true, the RNA hbonds will only consider atoms from the nucleobases.
    - It can remove a significant amount of noise from the grid, at the cost of some relevant interactions lost.


## [0.6.0] - 2026-04-10
- Added a `vgtools` utility for rotating grids.
- Implemented config option for ensuring *equilateral grids*.
    - These are grids that have the same amount of points in every dimension i.e. an homogeneous resolution. This is independent from the deltas.
    - Equilateral grids are naturally heavier, but they could be convenient for some operations.
- Improved the naive cavities finder by adding the possibility to perform multiple passes in evenly spaced rotations (controlled by the `CAVITIES_NPASSES` configuration)
- The `--config` (`-c`) flag can now also take a list of either config files or *keyword=value* pairs, or a mix of both.
- the **apbs** application and the `apbs.sh` utility now displayer errors properly.
- Some general code improvements.


## [0.5.1] - 2026-04-07
- INI parser now considers the standard `;` as comment start character.
    - This affects the `config.ini` files for the parameters and the `.chem` tables.


## [0.5.0] - 2026-04-05
- Implemented experimental **cavities** trimming operation.
- Added a `vgtools` utility for summarizing grids.


## [0.4.2] - 2026-04-03
- Bugfixes:
    - Fixed trimming mask being saved with an incorrect name.
    - When installing with pip, required packages should now be installed automatically corectly.
- New QOL features:
    - Volgrids version is now displayed with e.g. `volgrids --help` (or simply `volgrids`).
    - Old cmap output is now cleared when running smiffer.


## [0.4.1] - 2026-01-27
- Fixed bug where APBS grids weren't trimmed properly.
    - Cause: in the `APBS` pipeline, an intermediary `PQR` file is generated by `pdb2pqr`, which can add extra atoms in an attempt to fix the structures. Such atoms can include whole functional groups that weren't being considered before by `smiffer`'s trimmers.
- The intermediary `PQR` file is now saved as an output when dealing with a single structure (i.e. outside trajectory mode).


## [0.4.0] - 2026-01-16
- Bug fixes:
    - Fixed `config_volgrids.ini` never being used.
    - Fixed `ParserIni` parsing commented headers as uncommented.
- `ParserIni` now captures the text preceding the first header into an empty string key.
- Configuration files no longer use headers (headers can still be placed in the files for clarity, but they will be inconsequential).
- Added a separate timer for APBS subprocesses.


## [0.3.0] - 2026-01-15
- Fixed compatibility issue with Python 3.14.
- Added `GridIO.write_auto` method for generic output operations (format infered from path's suffix).
- Package requirements are now automatically checked/installed when installing VolGrids with PIP.
- Changed the way VolGrids should be run from the root directory of VolGrid's repo (when not installed). Instead of having separate entry scripts for every "application" (e.g. `smiffer.py`, `vgtools.py`...), these can be accessed by running `python3 volgrids` followed by the application name as an argument. For example, `python3 volgrids smiffer`.
- Similarly, if VolGrids is installed as a package, it can be called as an independent command from anywere. The previous example would correspond to `volgrids smiffer` instead.
- Added an **apbs** app to VolGrids. It intends to simplify the process of running APBS on structures without having to worry about intermediary files. Run by `volgrids apbs`.
- Changed the behavior of the `-a` flag for `smiffer`. Once again, it's only valid if an APBS output files follows; in such a case, than this file is used to generate the electrostatic SMIF. If the flag is not used, the application falls back to automatically calculating the APBS output as a temporary file.


## [0.2.0] - 2026-01-13
- APBS can now be automatically computed by Smiffer.
- Electrostatic smifs (APBS) can now be also generated in trajectory mode.


## [0.1.0] - 2026-01-13
- Initial upload to PyPI.
